Confirmation token flow
What it means in practice
Implementations classify requester trust and apply policy gates before operation dispatch. The exact trust taxonomy is
adapter-defined, but the enforcement pattern is consistent: low-trust contexts default toward safe reads, while higher-trust
contexts can unlock mutations or execution flows.
Typical mediation outcome
A validated user might be allowed to call list_files and update_profile , but blocked from
bulk_delete until stronger review, confirmation, or out-of-band verification is available.
Why the labels matter
Danger labels are the bridge between semantics and policy. They help an agent distinguish advisory actions from ones that must
pause for approval or trigger hard-stop verification.
Danger level
Example operation
Likely safety tier
Expected behavior
list_files
advisory
No intervention beyond normal logging
destructive
delete_account
Pause and require an approval path
dangerous
bulk_delete
Mandatory pause plus stronger verification
forbidden
drop_database
danger_zone
Hard stop with out-of-band verification
Request and required confirmation response
"operation": "delete_repo",
"params": {
"owner": "acme",
"repo": "widgets"
"success": false,
"error": {
"code": "CONFIRMATION_REQUIRED",
"message": "This operation requires confirmation",
"details": {
"danger_level": "destructive",
"confirmation_message": "Delete repository 'acme/widgets'?",
"confirmation_token": "conf_abc123xyz"
Confirmed retry
The client retries the same operation with the issued token. That keeps the first denial machine-readable and makes the second
request an explicit act of confirmation.
"repo": "widgets",
"_confirmation": "conf_abc123xyz"
What it means for agents
The execution safety loop means actions are evaluated before they happen, not merely logged afterward. An agent reports intent,
receives an autonomy decision, and only proceeds when the current step is allowed.
Lifecycle shape
Session-bound controls prevent stale confirmation tokens, unexpected operation drift, and hidden escalation during long-running execution.