MCP-AQL Docs | Getting Started
Launch Checklist
Adapter Patterns
Search MCP-AQL docs
In This Library
GETTING STARTED
Protocol Core
Error Model
Security Model
Conformance
Adapter Contracts
Implementation Profiles
Release Notes
What MCP-AQL is, why it exists, and what to read first
MCP-AQL consolidates many discrete MCP tools into a small semantic endpoint surface while preserving runtime discovery.
The result is less registration overhead, clearer routing, and a more scalable contract for agent-driven systems.
Spec README
Normative Draft
The one-paragraph version
MCP-AQL is a protocol specification and implementation toolkit for exposing adapter operations through either five CRUDE endpoints
or a single routed endpoint. It keeps introspect mandatory, treats the versioned spec as canonical, and positions
production profiles like DollhouseMCP as practical references rather than the definition of the protocol.
Why teams look at it
Lower token overhead
Instead of loading dozens of tool definitions, clients can register five semantic endpoints or one unified endpoint.
Runtime discovery
Clients discover operations, parameters, and types on demand with introspect .
Better public contracts
CRUDE classification, structured responses, and spec-linked docs make compatibility claims easier to inspect.
Quick-start request shape
Discover operations
"operation": "introspect",
"params": { "query": "operations" }
Call a discovered operation
"operation": "create_user",
"params": {
"email": "alice@example.com",
"name": "Alice"
The second example is schematic. Real operation names and parameters are adapter-defined and should be discovered first.
Suggested reading order
Read the versioned draft for the canonical rules.
Use Protocol Core for routing, request shape, and endpoint semantics.
Use Error Model and Security Model for operational expectations.
Use Conformance and Launch Checklist to understand current draft maturity.
&copy; 2026 DollhouseMCP Inc. d/b/a Dollhouse Research. MCP-AQL public draft documentation portal.
Docs Library
Portal Home
MCPAQL Organization
Dollhouse Research
DollhouseMCP Production Profile